---
category: philosophy
source: kindle
author: Yuval Noah Harari
title: Sapiens A Brief History of Humankind
---




There are no gods in the universe, no nations, no money, no human rights, no
laws, and no justice outside the common imagination of human beings.

No one was lying when, in 2011, the UN demanded that the Libyan government
respect the human rights of its citizens, even though the UN, Libya and human
rights are all figments of our fertile imaginations.

Homo sapiens soon far outstripped all other human and animal species in its
ability to cooperate.

One of history’s few iron laws is that luxuries tend to become necessities and
to spawn new obligations.

‘Biology enables, Culture forbids.’

Whatever is possible is by definition also natural. A truly unnatural
behaviour, one that goes against the laws of nature, simply cannot exist, so it
would need no prohibition.

suffering arises from craving; the only way to be fully liberated from
suffering is to be fully liberated from craving; and the only way to be
liberated from craving is to train the mind to experience reality as it is.

law, known as dharma

The first principle of monotheist religions is ‘God exists. What does He want
from me?’ The first principle of Buddhism is ‘Suffering exists. How do I escape
it?’

The modern age has witnessed the rise of a number of new natural-law religions,
such as liberalism, Communism, capitalism, nationalism and Nazism.

Scientists studying the inner workings of the human organism have found no soul
there. They increasingly argue that human behaviour is determined by hormones,
genes and synapses, rather than by free will

Level one chaos is chaos that does not react to predictions about it. The
weather, for example,

Level two chaos is chaos that reacts to predictions about it, and therefore can
never be predicted accurately. Markets, for example,

We study history not to know the future but to widen our horizons, to
understand that our present situation is neither natural nor inevitable, and
that we consequently have many more possibilities before us than we imagine.

In the year 1500, there were about 500 million Homo sapiens in the entire
world. Today, there are 7 billion.

human population has increased fourteen-fold, production 240-fold, and energy
consumption 115-fold.)

Newton showed that the book of nature is written in the language of
mathematics.

by their use of mathematical tools. Even fields of study that were
traditionally part of the humanities, such as the study of human language
(linguistics) and the human psyche (psychology), rely increasingly on
mathematics and seek to present themselves as exact sciences.

Confucius, Buddha, Jesus and Muhammad would have been bewildered if you told
them that in order to understand the human mind and cure its illnesses you must
first study statistics.

truth is a poor test for knowledge. The real test is utility. A theory that
enables us to do new things constitutes knowledge.

in many societies more people are in danger of dying from obesity than from
starvation.

Science can explain what exists in the world, how things work, and what might
be in the future. By definition, it has no pretensions to knowing what should
be in the future. Only religions and ideologies seek to answer such questions.

What potential did Europe develop in the early modern period that enabled it to
dominate the late modern world? There are two complementary answers to this
question: modern science and capitalism.

In the new capitalist creed, the first and most sacred commandment is: ‘The
profits of production must be reinvested in increasing production.’ That’s why
capitalism is called ‘capitalism’. Capitalism distinguishes ‘capital’ from mere
‘wealth’.

Capital consists of money, goods and resources that are invested in production.
Wealth, on the other hand, is buried in the ground or wasted on unproductive
activities.

Over the last few years, banks and governments have been frenziedly printing
money. Everybody is terrified that the current economic crisis may stop the
growth of the economy. So they are creating trillions of dollars, euros and yen
out of thin air, pumping cheap credit into the system, and hoping that the
scientists, technicians and engineers will manage to come up with something
really big, before the bubble bursts.

Some religions, such as Christianity and Nazism, have killed millions out of
burning hatred. Capitalism has killed millions out of cold indifference coupled
with greed.

The Atlantic slave trade did not stem from racist hatred towards Africans. The
individuals who bought the shares, the brokers who sold them, and the managers
of the slave-trade companies rarely thought about the Africans.

The Great Bengal Famine, discussed in the previous chapter, was caused by a
similar dynamic

The supreme commandment of the rich is ‘Invest!’ The supreme commandment of the
rest of us is ‘Buy!’

As Nietzsche put it, if you have a why to live, you can bear almost any how.
