# 10% Happier: How I Tamed the Voice in My Head, Reduced Stress Without Losing My Edge, and Found Self-Help That Actually Works--A True Story by Dan Harris

## The Ego
Your demons may have been ejected from the building, but they're out in the
parking lot, doing push-ups

The ego is never satisfied. No matter how much stuff we buy, no matter how many
arguments we win or delicious meals we consume, the ego never feels complete.

The ego is constantly comparing itself to others. It has us measuring our
self-worth against the looks, wealth, and social status of everyone else.

The ego thrives on drama. It keeps our old resentments and grievances alive
through compulsive thought.

- the ego was that it is obsessed with the past and the future, at the expense
  of the present.
- We "live almost exclusively through memory and anticipation," he wrote.
- We wax nostalgic for prior events during which we were doubtless ruminating
  or projecting. 
- We cast forward to future events during which we will certainly be fantasizing.
- But as Tolle pointed out, it is, quite literally, **always Now**.

When you have one foot in the future and the other in the past, you piss on the
present

recognize the "wisdom of insecurity."

**Monkey Mind**: the churning of the ego

## Meditation

1. Sit comfortably. 
2. Feel the sensations of your breath as it goes in and out. 
3. This one, according to all of the books I'd read, was the biggie. Whenever
   your attention wanders, just **forgive yourself and gently come back** to
   the breath. 

## Mindfulness and RAIN

indfulness is the ability to recognize what is happening in your mind right
now—anger, jealousy, sadness, the pain of a stubbed toe, whatever without
getting carried away by it.

When a big wave is coming at you, the best way not to get pummeled is to dive
right in.

**RAIN**
- R: recognize
- A: allow
- I: investigate
- N: non-identification

"Allow" is where you lean into it. The Buddhists were always talking about how
you have to "let go," but what they really meant is **"let it be."**

The final step—"non-identification"—meant seeing that just because I was
feeling angry or jealous or fearful, that did not render me a permanently angry
or jealous person. These were just **passing states of mind**.

Acceptance is not passivity.

What mindfulness does is create some space in your head so you can, as the
Buddhists say, **"respond" rather than simply "react."**

In the Buddhist view, you can't control what comes up in your head; it all
arises out of a mysterious void. We spend a lot of time judging ourselves
harshly for feelings that we had no role in summoning. **The only thing you can
control is how you handle it.**

**respond not react**

What he really meant was something like, "Everything in the world is ultimately
unsatisfying and unreliable because it won't last."

**hedonic adaptation**: When good things happen, we bake them very quickly into
our baseline expectations, and yet the primordial void goes unfilled.

"We've been put under a spell believing that this or that is going to be the
source of our ultimate freedom or happiness. And to wake up from that, to wake
up from that enchantment, to be more aligned with what is true, it brings us
much greater happiness."

The real superpower of meditation is not just to manage your ego more mindfully
but to see that the **ego itself has no actual substance**.

**The pursuit of happiness becomes the source of our unhappiness**

It's possible to sculpt your brain through meditation just as you build and
tone your body through exercise to grow your gray matter the way doing curls
grows your bicep.

"It's neuroscience that would say that **our capacity to multitask is virtually
nonexistent**. Multitasking is a computer-derived term. We have one processor.
We can't do it."

when you're moving from this project to this project, your mind flits back to
the original project, and it can't pick it up where it left off. So it has to
take a few steps back and then ramp up again, and that's where the productivity
loss is."

**take short mindfulness breaks throughout the day.**

instead of fidgeting or tapping your fingers while your computer boots up, try
to **watch your breath** for a few minutes.

we are selfish, but be wise selfish rather than foolish selfish

Brain scans showed that **acts of kindness** registered more like eating
chocolate than, say, fulfilling an obligation.

In the Buddha's day, he first taught generosity and morality before he gave his
followers meditation instructions.

spend the first five or ten minutes of my sessions picturing and sending good
vibes out to: myself, a "benefactor" (either Matt, Mark, or my parents), a
"dear friend" (my favorite cat, Steve), a "neutral person" (our overnight
doorman), a "difficult person" (not a hard category to fill), and then "all
living beings" (usually a National Geographic–style tour of the planet).

instituted a **make-eye-contact-and-smile** policy that turned out to be
genuinely enjoyable.

it's pretty simple to win people over, especially in tense situations, if
you're able to **take their perspective and validate their feelings**.

be simple, not a simpleton

Striving is fine, as long as it's tempered by the realization that, in an
entropic universe, **the final outcome is out of your control**

If you don't waste your energy on variables you cannot influence, you can focus
much more effectively on those you can.

When you are wisely ambitious, you do everything you can to succeed, but you
are not attached to the outcome, so that if you fail, you will be maximally
resilient, able to get up, dust yourself off, and get back in the fray.

## The Way of the Worrier

1. Don't Be a Jerk 
2. (And/But . . .) When Necessary, Hide the Zen 
3. Meditate 
4. The Price of Security Is Insecurity Until It's Not Useful 
5. Equanimity Is Not the Enemy of Creativity 
6. Don't Force It 
7. Humility Prevents Humiliation 
8. Go Easy with the Internal Cattle Prod 
9. Nonattachment to Results 
10. What Matters Most?

ability to respond instead of react to your impulses and urges.

"There's no point in being unhappy about things you can't change, and no point
being unhappy about things you can."

A useful mantra in those moments is **"What matters most?"**

the brain is a pleasure-seeking machine. Once you teach it, through meditation,
that abiding calmly in the present moment feels better than our habitual state
of clinging, over time, the brain will want more and more mindfulness.

## Bad reasons not to meditate.

1. "It's bullshit." according to the research, is that your brain will change
   in positive ways.  you will learn—maybe 10% of the time, maybe more—to
   respond, not react.  happiness, resilience, and compassion are skills,
   susceptible to training.  
2. "It's too hard for me." Welcome to the human condition. Everybody's mind is
   out of control. the idea that meditation requires you to "clear your mind"
   is a myth.  
3. "I don't have the time." start with five minutes a day and to tell yourself
   you'll never do more.  

## Basic Mindfulness Meditation

1. Sit comfortably.  keep your spine straight, but don't strain.
2. Feel your breath.
3. This one is the key: Every time you get lost in thought—which you will,
   thousands of times—gently return to the breath.

**forgiving yourself and starting over is the whole game**

"Beginning again and again is the actual practice, not a problem to overcome so
that one day we can come to the ‘real' meditation."

## Pro tips
- try making a soft mental note, like "in" and "out."
- "Noting," The act of applying a label—"planning," "throbbing,"
  "fantasizing"—can objectify whatever's going on, making it much less concrete
  and monolithic.
- Another trick for staying focused is to count your breaths.
- Try to meditate every day. Regularity is more important than duration.
- Set a timer. App: Insight Timer
- Find friends who are also interested in meditation.
- Find a teacher you trust.
- Beginning meditators are sometimes advised to sit at the same time and in the
  same place every day.
- Every once in a while, do a little reading about meditation or Buddhism. Even
  though the basic instructions are simple, hearing them repeatedly can be
  useful.

## some books I like:
- On meditation
  - Real Happiness, Sharon Salzberg
  - Insight Meditation, Joseph Goldstein
- On Buddhism and mindfulness in general
  - Going to Pieces Without Falling Apart, Dr. Mark Epstein 
  - Buddhism Without Beliefs, Stephen Batchelor

## Questions

quote from Jon Kabat-Zinn and put it up on your wall: "Meditation is not about
feeling a certain way. It's about feeling the way you feel."

You can't control what comes up, only how you respond.

What does boredom feel like? How does it manifest in your body? Whatever comes
up in your mind can be co-opted and turned into the object of meditation.

increase the level of difficulty in your meditation. Try feeling the breath
more closely. Can you catch the beginning and the end of an in- or out-breath?
Can you see yourself subtly leaning forward into the next breath instead of
being exactly where you are? Can you note the intervals between breaths?

## Variations of mindfulness meditation.

### Body scan
1. Sit, stand, or lie down.
2. Start at one end of your body and work up or down.
3. Every time your mind wanders, gently bring it back.

### Walking meditation

### Compassion meditation (aka metta)
1. This practice involves picturing a series of people and sending them good
   vibes. Start with yourself.
2. Repeat the following phrases: May you be happy, May you be healthy, May you
   be safe, May you live with ease. Do this slowly.
3. After you've sent the phrases to yourself, move on to: a benefactor (a
   teacher, mentor, relative), a close friend (can be a pet, too), a neutral
   person (someone you see often but don't really ever notice), a difficult
   person, and, finally, "all beings."

### Open awareness
1. Sit, stand, or lie down.
2. Instead of simply watching the breath, try to watch everything that arises.
   Set up a spy cam in your mind and just see what is there to see.
3. Every time you lose your focus, just forgive yourself and come back.

ALL DATES CAN CHANGE, SO CAN YOU.
