---
category: agile
author: Sarah A. Sheard
source: http://freyr.websages.com/Life_Cycle_of_a_Silver_Bullet.pdf
title: Life Cycle of a Silver Bullet
---




    The silver bullets for our executives are those new management trends that
    promise to transform the way business is done.  Examples over the decades
    have included Management by Objectives and Total Quality Management, while
    Six Sigma, Lean Enterprise, the Capability Maturity Model Integration
    (CMMI®), and agile software development techniques are more recent methods
    earning silver-bullet reputations. Process improvement initiatives like
    these can and do work, but how they are implemented is critical to their
    success.

## Phases

1. Fresh Start: _Envision a little pig in a suit, wiping a
bunch of architectural drawings and books off a table_

1. Executive Dedication and Openness: _Envision a little pig
constructing a house made of bricks_

1. Success

1. Publicity: _Envision a little pig proudly holding a book
showing a house of bricks on the cover. The book’s title e
Balle-Argentee Method.”_

1. Momentum

1. First Replication: _Envision two or three other little
pigs constructing house of wood._

1. Confirmation: _Envision a collection of books with houses
of wood on the cover_

1. Proceduralization: _Envision an entire village of houses
made of straw_

1. Diminished Returns: _Envision the village of straw houses
starting to crumble, propped up by sticks and invaded by
mice_

1. Blaming the Method: _Envision the big bad wolf blowing
down the village of straw houses._

1. Starting Fresh: _Envision a different little pig wiping a
bunch of books and drawings off his desk. One of the books
has a picture of a house of bricks on the cover_

## Morals of the Story


A sequence of steps, each consisting of decisions made for
good reasons, does not necessarily lead to a good result.

For best results, start at Phase 1 and stop at Phase 3.

Only by really looking at your company’s problems can you
solve them.  

Other people’s strategies worked for them because the
strategies were made for them. 

Do not assume that people who claim to be using a method
really are using it. 

There is nothing like the original. Do not read everyone
else’s interpretation of a method, read the original. 

The ROIs of multiple improvement initiatives do not add;
they interfere.  

Focus on what problems you want to solve, and work out as
executives how the initiatives contribute to solutions.  

Do not assume other companies’ ROI numbers will apply to
you.  They started from a different place and made different
investments.

## How to Use Silver Bullets

    You must focus on the business goal of improvement, not just on the method
    used to get there (e.g., CMMI) or on intermediate indicators (e.g., Level
    3)

**Everyone** Realize that all methods are a means to the end

**Executives** You have the responsibility to develop your
own understanding of what is impeding your company’s path

**Managers** You have to understand the method(s) you are
pushing

**Process Groups** Push back on managers demanding the same
results as other companies but in less time, with fewer
resources, and with less thought

**One Last Word** A truly successful effort will result when
a company develops specific solutions to its specific
concerns. 

    Second-generation applications of these methods can work if they are
    studied to determine where the true benefits came from, and applied
    intelligently with appropriate investment.
