---
categories: mba
author: Ed Catmul and Amy Wallace
source: kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00FUZQYBO
title: Creativity, Inc. Overcoming the Unseen Forces That Stand in the Way of True Inspiration
---




> The error we’d made was forgetting that “the process” has no agenda and
> doesn’t have taste.

Imagine an old, heavy suitcase whose well-worn handles are hanging by a few
threads. The handle is “Trust the Process” or “Story Is King”—a pithy statement
that seems, on the face of it, to stand for so much more. The suitcase
represents all that has gone into the formation of the phrase: the experience,
the deep wisdom, the truths that emerge from struggle. Too often, we grab the
handle and—without realizing it—walk off without the suitcase. What’s more, we
don’t even think about what we’ve left behind. After all, the handle is so much
easier to carry around than the suitcase.

> the key is not to let this trust, our faith, lull us into the abdication of
> personal responsibility.

**Mistakes are part of creativity**.

## STARTING POINTS THOUGHTS FOR MANAGING A CREATIVE CULTURE

Note: I copied the author's own summary to the top 

Note: The trick is to think of each following statement as a starting point, as
a prompt toward deeper inquiry, and not as a conclusion.

Give a good idea to a mediocre team, and they will screw it up. Give a mediocre
idea to a great team, and they will either fix it or come up with something
better. **If you get the team right, chances are that they’ll get the ideas
right**.

When looking to hire people, **give their potential to grow more weight than
their current skill level**. What they will be capable of tomorrow is more
important than what they can do today

**Always try to hire people who are smarter than you**. **Always take a chance
on better**, even if it seems like a threat

**If there are people in your organization who feel they are not free to
suggest ideas, you lose**. Do not discount ideas from unexpected sources.
Inspiration can, and does, come from anywhere.

It isn’t enough merely to be open to ideas from others. Engaging the collective
brainpower of the people you work with is an active, ongoing process. As a
manager, **you must coax ideas out of your staff and constantly push them to
contribute**

There are many valid reasons why people aren’t candid with one another in a
work environment. **Your job is to search for those reasons (for not being
candid) and then address them**

Likewise, **if someone disagrees with you, there is a reason**. Our first job
is to **understand the reasoning behind their conclusions**.

Further, **if there is fear in an organization, there is a reason for it**—our
job is (a) to find what’s causing it, (b) to understand it, and (c) to try to
root it out.

**There is nothing quite as effective, when it comes to shutting down
alternative viewpoints, as being convinced you are right**.

In general, people are hesitant to say things that might rock the boat.
**Braintrust meetings, dailies, postmortems, and Notes Day** are all efforts to
reinforce the idea that it is okay to express yourself. All are **mechanisms of
self assessment that seek to uncover what's real**

**If there is more truth in the hallways than in meetings, you have a problem**

**Many managers feel that if they are not notified about problems before others
are or if they are surprised in a meeting, then that is a sign of disrespect.
Get over it**.

Careful “messaging” to downplay problems makes you appear to be lying, deluded,
ignorant, or uncaring. **Sharing problems is an act of inclusion that makes
employees feel invested** in the larger enterprise.

**The first conclusions we draw from our successes and failures are typically
wrong**. Measuring the outcome without evaluating the process is deceiving.

Do not fall for the illusion that by preventing errors, you won’t have errors
to fix. The truth is, the **cost of preventing errors is often far greater than
the cost of fixing them**

**Change and uncertainty are part of life**. Our job is not to resist them but
to build the capability to recover when unexpected events occur. If you don’t
always try to uncover what is unseen and understand its nature, you will be ill
prepared to lead

Similarly, it is **not the manager’s job to prevent risks**. It is the
**manager’s job to make it safe to take them**.

**Failure isn’t a necessary evil. In fact, it isn’t evil at all. It is a
necessary consequence of doing something new**.

**Trust** doesn’t mean that you trust that someone won’t screw up—it **means
you trust them even when they do screw up**.

**The people ultimately responsible for implementing a plan must be empowered
to make decisions when things go wrong**, even before getting approval. Finding
and fixing problems is everybody’s job. **Anyone should be able to stop the
production line**.

**The desire for everything to run smoothly is a false goal**—it leads to
measuring people by the mistakes they make rather than by their ability to
solve problems

Don’t wait for things to be perfect before you share them with others. **Show
early and show often**. It’ll be pretty when we get there, but it won’t be
pretty along the way. And that's as it should be.

A **company’s communication structure should not mirror its organizational
structure**. Everybody should bre able to talk to anybody.

**Be wary of making too many rules**. Rules can simplify life for managers, but
they can be demeaning to the 95 percent who behave well. Don’t create rules to
rein in the other 5 percent—address abuses of common sense individually. This
is more work but ultimately healthier.

**Imposing limits can encourage a creative response**. Excellent work can
emerge from uncomfortable or seemingly untenable circumstances

**Engaging with exceptionally hard problems forces us to think differently**.

An organization, as a whole, is more conservative and resistant to change than
the individuals who comprise it. Do not assume that general agreement will lead
to change—**it takes substantial energy to move a group, even when all are on
board**

The healthiest organizations are made up of departments whose agendas differ
but whose goals are interdependent. **If one agenda wins, we all lose**

Our job as managers in creative environments is to **protect new ideas from
those who don’t understand that in order for greatness to emerge**, there must
be phases of not-so-greatness. **Protect the future, not the past**

**New crises are not alwaye lamentable**—they test and demonstrate a company’s
values. The process of problem-solving often bonds people together and keeps
the culture in the present

**Excellence, quality, and good should be earned words, attributed by others to
us**, not proclaime by ourselves.

Do not accidentally make stability a goal. **Balance is more important than
stability**

**Don’t confuse the process with the goal**. Working on our processes to make
them better, easier, and more efficient is an indispensable activity and
something we should continually work on—but it is not the goal. **Making the
product great is the goal**.

## PART II PROTECTING THE NEW

### CHAPTER 5 HONESTY AND CANDOR

replace the word honesty with another word that has a similar meaning but fewer
moral connotations: candor.

People have an easier time talking about their level of candor because they
don’t think they will be punished for admitting that they sometimes hold their
tongues. This is essential. **You cannot address the obstacles to candor until
people feel free to say that they exist** (and using the word honesty only
makes it harder to talk about those barriers).

**healthy creative culture is that its people feel free to share ideas,
opinions, and criticisms**.

**The Braintrust** Put smart, passionate people in a room together, charge them
with identifying and solving problems, and encourage them to be candid with one
another.

**without trust, creative collaboration is not possible**.

The fear of saying something stupid and looking bad, of offending someone or
being intimidated, of retaliating or being retaliated against—they all have a
way of reasserting themselves, even once you think they’ve been vanquished. And
when they do, you must address them squarely.

**early on, all of our movies suck**.

“from suck to not-suck.”

Creativity has to start somewhere,

candid feedback and the iterative process—reworking, reworking, and reworking
again, until a flawed story finds its throughline

crude mock-up of the film, known as reels. Then the Braintrust watches this
version

they do not prescribe how to fix the problems they diagnose. They test weak
points, they make suggestions, but it is up to the director to settle on a path
forward.

new version of the movie is generated every three to six months, and the
process repeats itself.

start with a basic truth: **People who take on complicated creative projects
become lost at some point in the process**.

No matter what, the process of coming to clarity takes patience and candor.

we try to create an environment where people want to hear each other’s notes,
even when those notes are challenging, and where everyone has a vested interest
in one another’s success.

With few exceptions, our directors make movies that they have conceived of and
are burning to make. Then, because we know that this passion will at some point
blind them to their movie’s inevitable problems, we offer them the counsel of
the Braintrust.

we don’t want the Braintrust to solve a director’s problem because we believe
that, in all likelihood, our solution won’t be as good as the one the director
and his or her creative team comes up with.

The film itself—not the filmmaker—is under the microscope. This principle
eludes most people, but it is critical: **You are not your idea**, and if you
identify too closely with your ideas, you will take offense when they are
challenged.

a director who’s struggling with his own dilemmas can see another director’s
struggles more clearly than his own. “It’s like I can put my crossword puzzle
away and help you with your Rubik’s Cube a little bit,”

**people need to be wrong as fast as they can**.

In a battle, if you’re faced with two hills and you’re unsure which one to
attack, he says, the right course of action is to hurry up and choose. If you
find out it’s the wrong hill, turn around and attack the other one.

Frank talk, spirited debate, laughter, and love.

That’s how much candor matters at Pixar: It overrides hierarchy.

A good note says what is wrong, what is missing, what isn’t clear, what makes
no sense.

offered at a timely moment, not too late to fix the problem.

doesn’t make demands; it doesn’t even have to include a proposed fix.

But if it does, that fix is offered only to illustrate a potential solution,
not to prescribe an answer. Most of all, though, a good note is specific. “I’m
writhing with boredom,” is not a good note.

Andrew Stanton says, “There’s a difference between criticism and constructive
criticism. With the latter, you’re constructing at the same time that you’re
criticizing. You’re building as you’re breaking down, making new pieces to work
with out of the stuff you’ve just ripped apart. That’s an art form in itself. I
always feel like whatever notes you’re giving should inspire the
recipient—like, ‘How do I get that kid to want to redo his homework?’ So,
you’ve got to act like a teacher. Sometimes you talk about the problems in
fifty different ways until you find that one sentence that you can see makes
their eyes pop, as if they’re thinking, ‘Oh, I want to do it.’ Instead of
saying, ‘The writing in this scene isn’t good enough,’ you say, ‘Don’t you want
people to walk out of the theater and be quoting those lines?’ It’s more of a
challenge. ‘Isn’t this what you want? I want that too!’ ”

**any successful feedback system is built on empathy**, on the idea that we are
all in this together, that we understand your pain because we’ve experienced it
ourselves.

### CHAPTER 6 FEAR AND FAILURE

From a very early age, the message is drilled into our heads: Failure is bad;
failure means you didn’t study or prepare; failure means you slacked off
or—worse!—aren’t smart enough to begin with. Thus, failure is something to be
ashamed of. This perception lives on long into adulthood,

if you fund thousands of research projects every year, some will have obvious,
measurable, positive impacts, and others will go nowhere. **We aren’t very good
at predicting the future**

yet the Golden Fleece Awards tacitly implied that researchers should know
before they do their research whether or not the results of that research would
have value.

Failure was being used as a weapon, rather than as an agent of learning.

If we as leaders can talk about our mistakes and our part in them, then we make
it safe for others.

While we don’t want too many failures, we must think of the cost of failure as
an investment in the future.

When experimentation is seen as necessary and productive, not as a frustrating
waste of time, people will enjoy their work—even when it is confounding them.

iterative trial and error—has long-recognized value in science.

There are arenas, of course, in which a zero failure rate is essential.
Commercial flying has a phenomenal safety record

we’ve set up a system in which directors are **allowed to spend years in the
development phase** of a movie, where the costs of iteration and exploration
are relatively low.

required decision-making, not just abstract discussion. While everyone working
on it had the best intentions, it got bogged down in hypotheticals and
possibilities.

To be a truly creative company, **you must start things that might fail**.

how do you know when to step in? The criteria we use is that we step in if a
director loses the confidence of his or her crew.

watch carefully for signs that a movie is stuck. Here is one: A Braintrust
meeting will occur, notes will be given, and three months later, the movie will
come back essentially unchanged. That is not okay.

As leaders, we should think of ourselves as teachers and try to create
companies in which teaching is seen as a valued way to contribute to the
success of the whole.

One of the most crucial responsibilities of leadership is creating a culture
that rewards those who lift not just our stock prices but our aspirations as
well.

We tell ourselves that we will devote more time to our people if we, in turn,
are given more slack in the schedule or budget, but **somehow the requirements
of the job always eat up the slack**, resulting in increased pressure with even
less room for error. Given these realities, managers typically want two things:
(1) for everything to be tightly controlled, and (2) to appear to be in
control.

**Fear can be created quickly; trust can’t**.

A manager’s default mode should not be secrecy. What is needed is a thoughtful
consideration of the cost of secrecy weighed against the risks.

When managers explain what their plan is without giving the reasons for it,
people wonder what the “real” agenda is. There may be no hidden agenda, but
you’ve succeeded in implying that there is one.

Are there ways to prove to your employees that your company doesn’t stigmatize
failure?

**Management’s job is not to prevent risk but to build the ability to
recover**.

### CHAPTER 7 THE HUNGRY BEAST AND THE UGLY BABY

**Originality is fragile**. And, in its first moments, it’s often far from
pretty. This is why I call early mock-ups of our films “ugly babies.”

My conclusion at the time was that finalizing the story before production began
was still a worthy goal—we just hadn’t achieved it yet. As we continued to make
films, however, I came to believe that my goal was not just impractical but
naïve. By insisting on the importance of getting our ducks in a row early, we
had come perilously close to embracing a fallacy. Making the process better,
easier, and cheaper is an important aspiration, something we continually work
on—but it is not the goal. Making something great is the goal.

**The Beast is a glutton but also a valuable motivator**. **The Baby is so pure
and unsullied, so full of potential, but it’s also needy and unpredictable**
and can keep you up at night. The key is for your Beast and your Babies to
coexist peacefully, and that requires that you keep various forces in balance.

when it comes to feeding the Beast, success only creates more pressure to hurry
up and succeed again.

at too many companies, the schedule (that is, the need for product) drives the
output, not the strength of the ideas at the front end.

In an unhealthy culture, each group believes that if their objectives trump the
goals of the other groups, the company will be better off. In a healthy
culture, all constituencies recognize the importance of balancing competing
desires—they want to be heard, but they don’t have to win.

“It seems like it’s good psychologically to expect these movies to be
troublesome,” Byron Howard, one of our directors at Disney, told me. “It’s like
someone saying, ‘Here, take care of this tiger, but watch your butt, they’re
tricky.’ I feel like my butt is safer when I expect the tiger to be tricky.”

“**In many ways, the work of a critic is easy**,” Ego says. “We risk very
little yet enjoy a position over those who offer up their work and their selves
to our judgment. We thrive on negative criticism, which is fun to write and to
read. But the bitter truth we critics must face is that in the grand scheme of
things, the average piece of junk is probably more meaningful than our
criticism designating it so. But there are times when a critic truly risks
something, and that is in the discovery and defense of the new. The world is
often unkind to new talent, new creations. The new needs friends.”

### CHAPTER 8 CHANGE AND RANDOMNESS

People want to hang on to things that work—stories

And as we become successful, our approaches are reinforced, and we become even
more resistant to change.

Unfortunately, we often have little ability to distinguish between what works
and is worth hanging on to and what is holding us back and worth discarding.

**Fear of change—innate, stubborn, and resistant to reason—is a powerful
force**.

One trick I’ve learned is to force myself to make a list of what’s actually
wrong. Usually, soon into making the list, I find I can group most of the
issues into two or three larger all-encompassing problems. So it’s really not
all that bad. Having a finite list of problems is much better than having an
illogical feeling that everything is wrong.”

We’re meant to push ourselves and try new things—which will definitely make us
feel uncomfortable.

“Sometimes in meetings, I sense people seizing up, not wanting to even talk
about changes,” he says. “So I try to trick them. I’ll say, ‘This would be a
big change if we were really going to do it, but **just as a thought exercise,
what if ...**’ Or, ‘I’m not actually suggesting this, but go with me for a
minute ...’

you have to pretend you’re not actually going to do anything, we’re just
talking, just playing around. Then if you hit upon some new idea that clearly
works, people are excited about it and are happier to act on the change.”

Another trick is to encourage people to play.

For many people, changing course is also a sign of weakness, tantamount to
admitting that you don’t know what you are doing. This strikes me as
particularly bizarre—personally,

Managers often see change as a threat to their existing business model—and,

**Play the ball where the monkey drops it**.”

randomness remains stubbornly difficult to understand. The problem is that our
brains aren’t wired to think about it. Instead, we are built to look for
patterns

If you haven’t done the work of teasing apart what is random and what you have
intentionally set in motion, you will be overly influenced by the analysis of
outside observers, which is often oversimplified.

**stochastic self-similarity**.

Stochastic simply means random

self-similarity describes the phenomenon—found in everything from stock market
fluctuations to seismic activity to rainfall—of

patterns that look the same when viewed at different degrees of magnification.

Look at a tiny section of a snowflake under a microscope, and it will resemble
a miniature version of the whole.

while we may attribute to it a pattern later, random events don’t come on time
or on schedule.

human tendency to treat big events as fundamentally different from smaller
ones.

When we put setbacks into two buckets—the “business as usual” bucket and the
“holy cow” bucket—and use a different mindset for each, we are signing up for
trouble.

failing to realize that some of our small problems will have long-term
consequences—and are, therefore, big problems in the making.

approach big and small problems with the same set of values and emotions,
because they are, in fact, self-similar.

Our people have good intentions. To think you can control or prevent random
problems by making an example of someone is naïve

**A culture that allows everyone, no matter their position, to stop the
assembly line**, both figuratively and literally, maximizes the creative
engagement of people who want to help.

If we allow more people to solve problems without permission, and if we
tolerate (and don’t vilify) their mistakes, then we enable a much larger set of
problems to be addressed.

**Everyone says they want to hire excellent people, but in truth we don’t
really know, at first, who will rise up to make a difference**.

putting in place **a framework for finding potential, then nurturing talent and
excellence, believing that many will rise, while knowing that not all will**.

We must **acknowledge the random events that went oue way**, because
acknowledging our good fortune—and not telling ourselves that everything we did
was some stroke of genius—lets us make more realistic assessments and
decisions.

### CHAPTER 9 THE HIDDEN

one of my core management beliefs: **If you don’t try to uncover what is unseen
and understand its nature, you will be ill prepared to lead**.

making room in my head for the certainty that, like it or not, some problems
will always be hidden from me has made me a better manager.

When faced with complexity, it is reassuring to tell ourselves that we can
uncover and understand every facet of every problem if we just try hard enough.
But that’s a fallacy. The better approach, I believe, is to accept that we
can’t understand every facet of a complex environment and to focus, instead, on
techniques to deal with combining different viewpoints.

In a healthy, creative culture, the people in the trenches feel free to speak
up and bring to light differing views that can help give us clarity.

The eagerness to get going, which gave the impression of efficiency, was
ultimately counterproductive

when managers understand that others see problems they don’t—and that they also
see solutions.

While character is crucial, I am also certain there were an infinite number of
“two-inch” events aside from my own that went our way—events

to be truly humble, those leaders must first understand how many of the factors
that shape their lives and businesses are—and will always be—out of sight.

Hindsight is not 20-20. Not even close. **Our view of the past, in fact, is
hardly clearer than our view of the future**. While we know more about a past
event than a future one, our understanding of the factors that shaped it is
severely limited.

“We should be careful to get out of an experience only the wisdom that is in
it—and stop there,” as Mark Twain once said, “lest we be like the cat that sits
down on a hot stove-lid. She will never sit down on a hot stove-lid again—and
that is well; but also she will never sit down on a cold one anymore.”

only about 40 percent of what we think we “see” comes in through our eyes. “The
rest is made up from memory or patterns that we recognize from past
experience,”

Our mental models aren’t reality. They are tools, like the models weather
forecasters use to predict the weather.

The tool is not reality. The key is knowing the difference.

While the allure of safety and predictability is strong, achieving true balance
means engaging in activities whose outcomes and payoffs are not yet apparent.
The most creative people are willing to work in the shadow of uncertainty.

## PART III BUILDING AND SUSTAINING

### CHAPTER 10 BROADENING OUR VIEW

four ideas that inform the way I think about managing.

The first, which I discussed in chapter 9, is that **our models of the world so
distort what we perceive that they can make it hard to see what is right in
front of us**.

The second is that **we don’t typically see the boundary between new
information coming in from the outside and our old, established mental
models—we perceive both together, as a unified experience**.

The third is that **when we unknowingly get caught up in our own
interpretations, we become inflexible**, less able to deal with the problems at
hand.

fourth idea is that **people who work or live together have, by virtue of
proximity and shared history, models of the world that are deeply (sometimes
hopelessly) intertwined with one another**.

#### 1. DAILIES, OR SOLVING PROBLEMS TOGETHER

Dailies are a key part of Pixar culture, not just because of what they
accomplish—constructive midstream feedback—but because of how they accomplish
it.

“Some people show their scenes to get critique from others, others come to
watch and see what kind of notes are being given—to learn from their peers and
from me—my style, what I like and dislike,” Mark told me. “The dailies keep
everyone in top form. It’s an intimidating room to be in because the goal is to
create the best animation possible. We go through every single frame with a
fine-toothed comb, over and over and over again. Sometimes there are full-on
debates because, truly, I don’t have all the answers. We work it out together.”

The first step is to teach them that everyone at Pixar shows incomplete work,
and everyone is free to make suggestions.

#### 2. RESEARCH TRIPS

When filmmakers, industrial designers, software designers, or people in any
other creative profession merely cut up and reassemble what has come before, it
gives the illusion of creativity, but it is craft without art.

**Craft is what we are expected to know; art is the unexpected use of our
craft**.

**You’ll never stumble upon the unexpected if you stick only to the familiar**.

what we’ve found is that when we are accurate, the audiences can tell. It just
feels right.

#### 3. THE POWER OF LIMITS

“the beautifully shaded penny.”

artists who work on our films care so much about every detail that they will
sometimes spend days or weeks crafting

**How, then, do you fix the “beautifully shaded penny” problem without telling
people, in effect, to care less or to be less excellent?**

In any creative endeavor, there is a long list of features and effects that you
want to include to nudge it toward greatness—a very long list. At some point,
though, you realize it is impossible to do everything on the list. So you set a
deadline, which then forces a priority-based reordering of the list, followed
by the difficult discussion of what, on this list, is absolutely necessary—

You don’t want to have this discussion too soon, because at the outset, you
don’t know what you are doing.

If you wait too long, however, you run out of time or resources.

However, some efforts to impose limits can backfire.

Disney Animation in 2006, thought that the best way to keep everybody operating
within agreed-upon limits was to put in an “oversight group”

from the point of view of those who worked in production on any given film, the
oversight group was a hindrance,

nitpicked every decision—even the tiniest decision—to death.

morale plummeted.

We simply eliminated the oversight group.

The micromanagement they imposed was of no value, since the production people
already had a set of limits that determined their every move—the overall budget
and the deadline.

The oversight group had been put in place without anyone **asking a fundamental
question: How do we enable our people to solve problems? Instead, they asked:
How do we prevent our people from screwing up?**

#### 4. INTEGRATING TECHNOLOGY AND ART

One of the advantages we had at Pixar, from the beginning, was that technology,
art, and business were integrated into the leadership, with each of the
company’s leaders—me, John, and Steve—paying a fair amount of attention to the
areas where we weren’t considered expert.

#### 5. SHORT EXPERIMENTS

Scientific research operates in this way—when you embark on an experiment, you
don’t know if you will achieve a breakthrough. Chances are, you won’t. But
nevertheless, you may stumble on a piece of the puzzle along the way—a glimpse,
if you will, into the unknown.

Our short films are Pixar’s way of experimenting,

including short films at the beginning of our feature films. These three- to
six-minute films,

learned that shorts are a relatively inexpensive way to screw up.

As Joe Ranft said at the time, **“Better to have train wrecks with miniature
trains than with real ones.”**

#### 6. LEARNING TO SEE

Elyse taught us that while many activities used both L-mode and R-mode, drawing
required shutting the L-mode off. This amounted to learning to suppress that
part of your brain that jumps to conclusions, seeing an image as only an image
and not as an object.

For example, since the eyes and mouth—the loci of communication—are more
important to us than foreheads, more emphasis is put on recognizing them, and
when we draw them, we tend to draw them too large,

fundamental misconception that art classes are about learning to draw. In fact,
they are about learning to see.)

When we give notes on Pixar movies and isolate a scene, say, that isn’t
working, we have learned that fixing that scene usually requires making changes
somewhere else in the film, and that is where our attention should go.

Our filmmakers have become skilled at not getting caught up in a problem but
instead looking elsewhere in the story for solutions.

#### 7. POSTMORTEMS

Over the years, some were profound, and others were a complete waste of time.
Sometimes people showed up but pulled their punches.

People, in general, would rather talk about what went right than what went
wrong, using the occasion to give additional kudos to their most deserving team
members. Left to our own devices, we avoid unpleasantness.

There are five reasons, I believe, to do postmortems.

1. Consolidate What’s Been Learned [
   kindle](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00FUZQYBO&location=3282)

Any individual can have a great insight but may not have the time to pass it
on. A process might be flawed, but you don’t have time to fix it under the
current schedule.

Sitting down afterward is a way of consolidating all that you’ve learned—before
you forget it.

2. Teach Others Who Weren’t There [
   kindle](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00FUZQYBO&location=3287)

3. Don’t Let Resentments Fester [
   kindle](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00FUZQYBO&location=3291)

4. Use the Schedule to Force Reflection [
   kindle](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00FUZQYBO&location=3295)

5. Pay It Forward [
   kindle](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B00FUZQYBO&location=3300)

raise questions that should be asked on the next project.

you come up with a format that works well in one instance, people will know
what to expect the next time, and they will game the process.

So **try “mid-mortems” or narrow the focus of your postmortem to special
topics**.

One **technique I’ve used to soften the process is to ask everyone in the room
to make two lists: the top five things that they would do again and the top
five things that they wouldn’t do again**.

make use of data. Because we’re a creative organization, people tend to assume
that much of what we do can’t be measured or analyzed. That’s wrong. Many of
our processes involve activities and deliverables that can be quantified. We
keep track of the rates at which things happen, how often something has to be
reworked, how long something actually took versus how long we estimated it
would take, whether a piece of work was completely finished or not when it was
sent to another department, and so on.

**There are limits to data, however, and some people rely on it too heavily.
Analyzing it correctly is difficult, and it is dangerous to assume that you
always know what it means**.

A large portion of what we manage can’t be measured, and not realizing this has
unintended consequences. The problem comes when people think that data paints a
full picture, leading them to ignore what they can’t see.

Here’s my approach: **Measure what you can, evaluate what you measure, and
appreciate that you cannot measure the vast majority of what you do**.

And at least every once in a while, make time to take a step back and think
about what you are doing.

#### 8. CONTINUING TO LEARN

Pixar University

we gradually began expanding P.U.’s curriculum. Sculpting, painting, acting,
meditation, belly dancing, live-action filmmaking, computer programming, design
and color theory, ballet—over

something about an apprentice lighting technician sitting alongside an
experienced animator, who in turn was sitting next to someone who worked in
legal or accounting or security—that proved immensely valuable.

Hierarchy did not apply, and as a result, communication thrived.

it was to send a signal about how important it is for every one of us to keep
learning new things.

in Japanese Zen, that idea of not being constrained by what we already know is
called “beginner’s mind.” And people practice for years to recapture and keep
ahold of it.

**By resisting the beginner’s mind, you make yourself more prone to repeat
yourself than to create something new**.

**composer Philip Glass once said, “The real issue is not how do you find your
voice, but getting rid of the damn thing.”**

### CHAPTER 11 THE UNMADE FUTURE

“The best way to predict the future is to invent it.”

John Walker, stays calm by imagining his very taxing job as holding a giant
upside-down pyramid in his palm by its pointy tip. “I’m always looking up,
trying to balance it,” he says. “Are there too many people on this side or that
side? In my job, I do two things, fundamentally: artist management and cost
control. Both depend on hundreds of interactions that are happening above me,
up in the fat end of the pyramid. And I have to be okay with the fact that I
don’t understand a freaking thing that’s going on half the time—and that that
is the magic. **The trick, always, is keeping the pyramid in balance**.”

if he tightens up or thinks too much, he crashes.

he also knows that if he lingers too long in that frightened place, he will
freak out. “So I tell myself that I have time, even when I don’t.

the course of a week, I cracked the lens of my goggles four times. Four times I
had to go to the ski store and say, ‘I need a new piece of plastic,’ because I
had shattered it crashing into something. And at some point, I realized that I
was crashing because I was trying so hard not to crash. So I relaxed and told
myself, ‘It’s going to be scary when I make the turns really fast, but I’m
going to push that mountain away and enjoy it.’ When I adopted this positive
attitude, I stopped crashing.

Athletes and musicians often refer to being in “the zone”—that mystical place
where their inner critic is silenced and they completely inhabit the moment,
where the thinking is clear and the motions are precise.

“**The goal is to get so comfortable and relaxed with your instrument, or
process, that you can just get Zen with it and let the music flow without
thinking**,

People want their leaders to be confident. Andrew doesn’t advise being
confident merely for confident’s sake. He believes that leadership is about
making your best guess and hurrying up about it so if it’s wrong, there’s still
time to change course.

collaboration brings complications. Other people have so much to recommend
them: They will help you see outside yourself; they will rally when you are
flagging; they will offer ideas that push you to be better. But they will also
require constant interaction and communication.

“If you’re sailing across the ocean and your goal is to avoid weather and
waves, then why the hell are you sailing?”

Good producers—and good managers—don’t dictate from on high. They reach out,
they listen, they wrangle, coax, and cajole. And their mental models of their
jobs reflect that.

“One of Kahler’s big teachings is about meeting people where they are,”
Katherine says, referring **Kahler's Process Communication Model**,

**Driving the train doesn’t set its course. The real job is laying the track**.

study of mindfulness,

resonated with many of the issues I spent so much time thinking about at Pixar:
control, change, randomness, trust, consequences.

If you are mindful, you are able to focus on the problem at hand without
getting caught up in plans or processes.

The models in our heads embolden us as we whistle through the dark. Not only
that, they enable us to do the exhilarating and difficult work of navigating
the unknown.

## PART IV TESTING WHAT WE KNOW

### CHAPTER 12 A NEW CHALLENGE

**Earning trust takes time; there’s no shortcut to understanding that we really
do rise and fall together**.

Without vigilant coaching—pulling people aside who didn’t speak their minds in
a particular meeting, say, or encouraging those who seem eternally hesitant to
jump into the fray—our progress could have easily stalled. Telling the truth
isn’t easy.

smaller groups within the larger whole should be allowed to differentiate
themselves and operate according to their own rules, so long as those rules
work.

when talking about making a movie, **easy isn’t the goal. Quality is the
goal**.

### CHAPTER 13 NOTES DAY

try something that we hoped would break the logjam and reinvigorate the studio.
We called it Notes Day,

what makes me most proud is how our people respond to crisis.

there is talk of “our” problem and of what “we” can do to solve it together.

Nobody wanted to have worked on the first movie that didn’t open at number one.
And the result was a growing temptation to pour too much visual detail into
each film—to make it “perfect.” That honorable-sounding desire—we call it
“plussing”—was accompanied by a kind of paralyzing anxiety.

“personal project days.” Two days a month, he allowed his engineers to work on
anything they wanted, using Pixar’s resources to engage with whatever problem
or question they found interesting.

At one point, he’d suggested shutting down Pixar for a week at the end of a
movie’s production cycle to talk about what went right, what went wrong, and
how to reboot for the next project—a sort of super-postmortem. The idea wasn’t
practical, in the end, but it was thought-provoking.

In the end, four thousand emails poured into the Notes Day suggestion
box—containing one thousand separate ideas in all.

people would determine their own schedules, signing up for only the sessions
that interested them. Each of the Notes Day discussion groups would be led by a
facilitator

sessions weren’t organized by job or by department. They were organized by
individual interest.

the biggest payoff of Notes Day was that we made it safer for people to say
what they thought.

What made Notes Day work? To me, it boils down to three factors. First, there
was a clear and focused goal. This wasn’t a free-for-all but a wide-ranging
discussion (organized around topics suggested not by Human Resources or by
Pixar’s executives, but by the company’s employees) aimed at addressing a
specific reality: the need to cut our costs by 10 percent.

Second, this was an idea championed by those at the highest levels of the
company.

Third, and relatedly, Notes Day was led from within.

I’ve said it before, but it bears repeating: Things change, constantly, as they
should. And with change comes the need for adaptation, for fresh thinking, and,
sometimes, for even a total reboot—of

In times of change, we need support—from our families and from our colleagues.

**In a word: PERSIST. PERSIST on telling your story. PERSIST on reaching your
audience. PERSIST on staying true to your vision**.

## AFTERWORD THE STEVE WE KNEW

It wasn’t that passion trumped logic in Steve’s mind. He was well aware that
decisions must never be based on emotions alone. But he also saw that
creativity wasn’t linear, that art was not commerce, and that to insist upon
applying dollars-and-cents logic was to risk disrupting the thing that set us
apart. Steve put a premium on both sides of this equation, logic and emotion,
and the way he maintained that balance was key to understanding him.

Steve looked around at the circus—the elegantly turned-out men and women, the
scrum of television interviewers, the throngs of paparazzi and screaming
onlookers, the line of limousines pulling up at the curb—and said, “What this
scene really needs is a Buddhist monk lighting himself on fire.”

